---
title: In and Out
tags:
- Explanation
layout: layout.njk
---

# Translation!

I've been translating works by Borges and Jiménez now for a couple months, and I felt proud enough to share this one. Translation is an incredibly rewarding process that makes you appreciate the poet and the language more and more with every line. Each poem promises a new adventure, and each stanza brings it's own challenge to be resolved with research, technique, and artistry. If you can't translate yourself, I encourage you to read about the process just a bit. Many scholars have analyzed Borges's translation of Whitman's "Leaves of Grass", including in (this accesible essay)[https://pre.borges.pitt.edu/sites/default/files/1909.pdf] by Nataly Tcherepashenets, which is a good introduction to what makes the problem of translation such an interesting one.

# The Nuts and Bolts

This post is another pretty simple one. I made the translation a while back in a markdown document, so I just copy and pasted each line of the spanish into an html span block. Then I grabbed the parts of the English that corresponded to ecah block and made a partner in the other column. The highlighting is some simple javascript, and the commentary exists as an invisble javascript object behind the scenes that is rendered depending on which line is selected. No backend here, just some nice javascript interactivity and a little hidden treasure hunt for the juicy commentary.

# Accreditation

The original poem is by Juan Ramón Jiménez, and my translation and all the commentary is the result of my own work and research using a wordReference, a powerful reference for nuanced word-to-word translation. No text in this project is or was generated by an LLM. From now on, I'm planning on adding this section to each explanation so it's clear what is handwritten and what is procedurally generated.

# Future Posts

I may continue this format with some other translations, but I also like the idea of each breath being a little different. So if I do post about translation in the future, it'll probably be in a new format. I'm still messing around with projects that let users write more, because a lot of you who read these are pretty smart cookies yourselves, and I'd love to see what you can come up with.